OSDOCS-8931: Detail step for adding IPv6 to existing dual-stack clusters (#75232)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/nw-dual-stack-convert.adoc

[id="nw-dual-stack-convert_{context}"]
= Converting to a dual-stack cluster network

> As a cluster administrator, you can convert your single-stack cluster network to a dual-stack cluster network. After the converting to dual-stack networking operation, newly created pods and existing pods have dual-stack networking enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a cluster administrator, you can convert your single-stack cluster network to a dual-stack cluster network. After converting to a dual-stack network, new and existing pods have dual-stack networking enabled.
```

Converting a single-stack cluster network to a dual-stack cluster network consists of creating patches and applying them to the cluster's network and infrastructure.

[NOTE]
====

> Each patch operation that changes a `clusterNetwork`, a `serviceNetwork`, an `apiServerInternalIPs` or an `ingressIP` object triggers a restart of the cluster. Changing the `MachineNetworks` object does not cause a reboot of the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each patch operation that changes a `clusterNetwork`, `serviceNetwork`, `apiServerInternalIPs`, or `ingressIP` object triggers a restart of the cluster. Changing the `MachineNetworks` object does not cause a reboot of the cluster.
```

.Procedure

> . To specify IPv6 address blocks for the cluster and service networks, create a file that has a configuration similar to the following YAML configuration file:

Author: Similar or identical?

.Procedure

> . To specify IPv6 address blocks for the cluster and service networks, create a YAML configuration patch file that has a similar configuration to the following example file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To specify IPv6 address blocks for the cluster and service networks, create a YAML configuration patch file that has a similar configuration to the following example:
```

  path: /spec/serviceNetwork/-
  value: fd02::/112 <2>
----
<1> Specify an object with the `cidr` and `hostPrefix` fields. The host prefix must be `64` or greater. The IPv6 Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) prefix must be large enough to accommodate the specified host prefix.
<2> Specify an IPv6 CIDR with a prefix of `112`. Kubernetes uses only the lowest 16 bits. For a prefix of `112`, IP addresses are assigned from `112` to `128` bits.

> . To patch the cluster network configuration, enter the following command in your CLI:

Author: "cluster network configuration" reads a bit too backend. Would "cluster's network " work?

Reviewer 2: How about "To patch the configuration"? It should be clear, if you went so far in this doc, that we are talking about network confguration

<2> Specify an IPv6 CIDR with a prefix of `112`. Kubernetes uses only the lowest 16 bits. For a prefix of `112`, IP addresses are assigned from `112` to `128` bits.

. To patch the cluster network configuration, enter the following command in your CLI:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc patch network.config.openshift.io cluster \ <1>
  --type='json' --patch-file <file>.yaml
----
<1> Where `file` specifies the name of your created YAML file.

+
.Example output
[source,text]
----
network.config.openshift.io/cluster patched
----

. To specify IPv6 address blocks for the cluster infrastructure, create a YAML configuration patch file that has a similar configuration to the following example file. You must specify the path to the machineNetworks` parameter to convert your single-stack cluster network to a dual-stack cluster network.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- op: add
  path: /spec/platformSpec/baremetal/machineNetworks/- <1>
  value: fd2e:6f44:5dd8::/64
- op: add
  path: /spec/platformSpec/baremetal/apiServerInternalIPs/- <2>
  value: fd2e:6f44:5dd8::4
- op: add
  path: /spec/platformSpec/baremetal/ingressIPs/-
  value: fd2e:6f44:5dd8::5
----

> <1> Specify IPv6 address blocks for machines on your single-stack network. Ensure that address blocks do not overlap. Each address block gets validated against the network inteface address list to check for matching IP addresses.

Author: What does the checking? Also is the "network inteface address list" correct?

  path: /spec/serviceNetwork/-
  value: fd02::/112 <2>
----
<1> Specify an object with the `cidr` and `hostPrefix` fields. The host prefix must be `64` or greater. The IPv6 Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) prefix must be large enough to accommodate the specified host prefix.
<2> Specify an IPv6 CIDR with a prefix of `112`. Kubernetes uses only the lowest 16 bits. For a prefix of `112`, IP addresses are assigned from `112` to `128` bits.

. To patch the cluster network configuration, enter the following command in your CLI:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc patch network.config.openshift.io cluster \ <1>
  --type='json' --patch-file <file>.yaml
----
<1> Where `file` specifies the name of your created YAML file.

+
.Example output
[source,text]
----
network.config.openshift.io/cluster patched
----

> . To patch the network infrastructure, enter the following command in your CLI:

Author: "Patch network infrastructure" is correct?

  path: /spec/serviceNetwork/-
  value: fd02::/112 <2>
----
<1> Specify an object with the `cidr` and `hostPrefix` fields. The host prefix must be `64` or greater. The IPv6 Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) prefix must be large enough to accommodate the specified host prefix.
<2> Specify an IPv6 CIDR with a prefix of `112`. Kubernetes uses only the lowest 16 bits. For a prefix of `112`, IP addresses are assigned from `112` to `128` bits.

> . To patch the cluster network configuration, enter the following command in your CLI:

Reviewer: Just suggesting the most common way to do this. In any case, don't need "in your CLI".
```suggestion
. Patch the cluster network configuration by running the following command:
```

Author: Thanks. I went with "entering": 

![Screenshot from 2024-05-09 08-57-05](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/assets/57954076/86471ca4-efb7-4216-b2e5-e6bca3b72b22)

Reviewer: Yep, either is fine. I tend to use "running" since it's by far the most common in the repo (for consistency), but "entering" is valid per our guidelines :)

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc patch network.config.openshift.io cluster \ <1>

Reviewer: This will fix the color in the syntax highlighting in the output:
```suggestion
$ oc patch network.config.openshift.io cluster \// <1>
```

  --type='json' --patch-file <file>.yaml
----
<1> Where `file` specifies the name of your created YAML file.
+
.Example output
[source,text]
----
network.config.openshift.io/cluster patched
----

> . To specify IPv6 address blocks for the cluster infrastructure, create a YAML configuration patch file that has a similar configuration to the following example file:

Reviewer 2: This line as discussed on Slack

> . To specify IPv6 Virtual IPs (VIPs) for API and Ingress services for your cluster, create a YAML configuration patch file that has a similar configuration to the following example file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To specify IPv6 Virtual IPs (VIPs) for API and Ingress services for your cluster, create a YAML configuration patch file that has a similar configuration to the following example:
```

> . To specify IPv6 Virtual IPs (VIPs) from API and Ingress services for your cluster, create a YAML configuration patch file that has a similar configuration to the following example file:

Reviewer 2: Change "from" to "for"? I mean, we are specifying IP address that will be used by the API service

Author: Thanks. Updated.

+
[source,yaml]
----
- op: add
  path: /spec/platformSpec/baremetal/machineNetworks/- <1>
  value: fd2e:6f44:5dd8::/64
- op: add
  path: /spec/platformSpec/baremetal/apiServerInternalIPs/- <2>
  value: fd2e:6f44:5dd8::4
- op: add
  path: /spec/platformSpec/baremetal/ingressIPs/-
  value: fd2e:6f44:5dd8::5
----

> <1> Ensure that you specify an address block for the `machineNetwork` network where your machines operate. You must select both API and Ingress IP addresses for the machine network.

Reviewer 2: Change "for" to "from"? I mean, we have a network and we need to select 2 IP addresses that belong to this network. The network is "predefined" (it's a state of the universe, we can't change it) and IPs are our arbitrary choice

> <1> Specify IPv6 address blocks for machines that run on your single-stack network. Ensure that address blocks do not overlap. Each address block gets validated against the network interface to verify matching address blocks.

Reviewer 2: This line as discussed on Slack

<2> Ensure that you specify each file path according to your platform. The example demonstrates a file path on a bare-metal platform.

> . To patch the cluster's infrastructure, enter the following command in your CLI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.  Patch the cluster's infrastructure by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc patch infrastructure cluster \ <1>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc patch infrastructure cluster \// <1>
```

  --type='json' --patch-file <file>.yaml
----
<1> Where `file` specifies the name of your created YAML file.
+
.Example output
[source,text]
----
infrastructure/cluster patched
----

> .Verification

Reviewer: Do these two verification steps have to be done in order? If the order doesn't matter, switch the ordered list to a bulleted list :)

Author: Yes, they are separate because the patch commands are different.

> . To verify the successful installation of the patch on the cluster network configuration, show the network configuration, and then verify that the cluster network configuration recognizes the IPv6 address blocks that you specified in the YAML file.

Reviewer: Should ideally be something like "show the network configuration by running the following command:"

I'll often put the things to look for ("verify that the cluster network configuration recognizes the IPv6 address blocks that you specified in the YAML file") in the output under the CLI step ahead of the output

Author: Thanks, updated.

  Service Network:
    172.30.0.0/16
    fd02::/112
# ...
----

> . To verify the successful installation of the patch on the cluster's infrastructure, show the infrastructure configuration, and then verify that the cluster recognizes the IPv6 address blocks that you specified in the YAML file.

Reviewer: Same here as above

Author: Thanks, updated.
